**Abstract**

COPD refers to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; a group of progressive lung diseases that blocks airflow and makes it difficult for people to breathe. It affects millions of Americans and is one of the leading causes of death along with conditions such as heart disease and cancer. COPD is commonly caused by long-term exposure to toxic substances and is specifically associated with cigarette smoking.

This study seeks to investigate the relationship between lung function over time by analyzing Forced Expiratory Volume in one second (FEV1), along with other given categories in the data. The objective is to determine which categories would help predict FEV1 five years later (FEV1_phase2). Identifying these associations can provide valuable insight into how COPD progresses. The data analyzed was obtained from the COPDGene research group study, which includes spirometry data on thousands of research participants. Variables range from basic identifiers such as gender, race, and age, to more elaborate details such as smoking status, BMI, respiratory disease status, and more.

For data visualization, the relationships between FEV1_phase2 and multiple categorical variables were analyzed. For this process, gender, race, smoking status, emphysema status, and asthma status were plotted onto separate boxplots.

The gender, emphysema, and asthma categories showed the most difference in FEV1_phase2 between their two groups. For gender, male patients had a wider range of FEV1_phase2 in comparison to female patients. The emphysema status boxplot showed that those who reported to have emphysema had a higher interquartile range than those who did not have emphysema. The asthma status boxplot showed a greater range in FEV1_phase2 for people who reported to have asthma.

Statistical tests were performed by using bootstrapping and 95% confidence intervals for each categorical variable. Of these categories, only the race category indicated a significant difference in FEV1_phase2 with white and black patients. The other respective statistical tests did not show any significant difference, as all of them included 0 in their confidence intervals.

The next section of data visualization dealt with the relationship between FEV1_phase2 and numeric variables from the dataset. The variables chosen were height, weight, heart rate, BMI, and age. The only categories of these five that showed a linear relationship were height and age. For height, there was a positive linear relationship with FEV1_phase2 as taller patients tended to have a greater volume of FEV1_phase2 than shorter patients. For age, there was a negative linear relationship, where younger patients tended to have a greater volume of FEV1_phase2 than shorter patients. The other categories did not show much of a relationship if any at all.

More statistical tests were performed by using bootstrapping and 95% confidence intervals for each numeric variable. These tests checked for the results of the slopes of each graph’s linear regression. The height and age categories were the only categories of the five with a slope significantly different from zero.

Only positive values would be within height's 95% confidence interval, reflecting 95% confidence that the true population slope for height would be positive and suggesting a positive correlation between height and fever 1 phase 2. Meanwhile, only negative values were within age's 95% confidence interval, reflecting 95% confidence that the true population slope was negative and suggesting a negative correlation between age and fever 1 phase 2. However, zero was within the confidence intervals for the other three categories, signifying 95% confidence that the population slope would not be significantly different from zero. This suggests a lack of correlation between each of the categories with fever 1 phase 2. This data reflects similar observations to the previous visual representation, as height and age were the only categories to show correlation on their respective scatterplots.

The analysis revealed that variables such as age, height, race, and certain respiratory conditions are associated with FEV1_phase2 in COPD patients in the dataset. The results of this study suggest the influence of demographic and clinical characteristics in predicting COPD progression and may aid in identifying high-risk patients earlier.

(Data is via the COPDGene dataset: https://copdgene.org/)
